Consistency Criterion for Particle Sorting in Single-Particle Cryo-EM
Daniel Asarnow and Yifan Cheng
 
Current cryo-EM datasets contain tens of thousands to millions of high quality single-particle images, representing snapshots of all states present in solution. They also contain many “bad” particles, e.g. damaged or unfolded protein or other contaminants. High resolution reconstructions hinge on 1) identifying and eliminating “bad” particles, 2) separating remaining “good” particles into distinct classes, and 3) obtaining accurate orientation estimates for particles in each class. Particle sorting attempts to differentiate between “good” and “bad” particles, but typically does not address persistent misalignment of “good” particles.
In order to further high-resolution structure determination of macromolecules that are inherently difficult for image alignment because of lack of obvious structural features, such as membrane proteins without any soluble domain and embedded in lipid nanodiscs, we describe an approach attempting to differentiate “misaligned” and “well-aligned” particles based on consistency of particle alignment across multiple de novo 3D refinements with different random initializations. The orientation alignment differences of the same particles during multiple refinements are calculated using the geodesic distance in SO(3), and consistency is defined as having similar final orientations across all refinements. Symmetry is accounted for by taking the minimum geodesic between all symmetry related orientations.
We applied this approach to the published cryo-EM dataset of the TRPV1 ion, and to a synthetic dataset that contains only the transmembrane domain of TRPV1. The entire TRPV1 ion channel embedded in lipid nanodisc has well-defined soluble domains, facilitating image alignment. On the contrary, particles of the synthetic dataset lack well-defined molecule shape. We found that, compared to the whole TRPV1, the proportion of particles with inconsistent orientation assignment increases significantly (~24% vs ~70%) for the synthetic dataset which contains only transmembrane domain of TRPV1 embedded in lipid nanodisc.
We additionally found that a 3D reconstruction calculated from the subset of particles with consistent orientation assignment can reach a higher resolution than the whole dataset, using the same resolution estimation criterion. Interestingly, a 3D reconstruction calculated from the excluded particles with inconsistent angular assignment has generally worse features, but still reached a relatively high resolution. This observation suggests that such particles are likely misaligned “good” particles, rather than residual “bad” particles persisting through 3D classification.  
Future work is focused on determining the balance between misalignment and residual “bad” particles, rescuing good but misaligned particles, and refining the approach to use orientation distribution statistics from a single refinement rather than many repeated initializations.
